# The Philosophy of the Tags Backend

*This is an unfinished document and contains my immature ideas.*

## Considering the strengths of ctags

From Citre's perspective, we want to find out what are the fundamental
strengths of ctags, that decides what should a frontend of a ctags works, and
how people should use it. The result of my investigation on this is: *ctags is
hackable, and ctags works for multi-language projects.*

As tags file contains abundant information about definitions, and we have
readtags to filter then as we like, one dangerous temptation is trying to be
"intelligent", which means to parse the syntax around point, to guess which
tags are likely to be the real definitions among other tags with the same name,
and keeps only them for the user. As we'll see, this contradicts with the above
mentioned "real strengths".

### Ctags is hackable

Ctags could be easily extended to tag definitions in DSL code. There are some
examples in [More About Tags
Backend](../user-manual/more-about-tags-backend.md).

In DSL-heavy codes (that based on similar libraries), only ctags (with
extensions using regexp/optscript) could produce not-so-bad indexing. This is
more true for Lisp (with real macros) and other languages that have
meta-programming ability.

A ctags frontend needs to work well with such usage, and this contradicts with
being intelligent. For example, when filling the arguments of a function, we
could check it's signature, and only provides variables that has the "right"
type for auto-completion, but what if the user wants to put a DSL-defined thing
here (which may be tagged by user-extension and doesn't have the actual type
recorded)? The signature won't tell you about this usage. Similar difficulties
happen more with DSL-heavier codes.

### Ctags works for multi-language projects

This is simple: Most "go to definition" tools based on tags files simply search
for tags by their names, and don't restrict the language, so for example, you
can jump to the implementation of a function in another language. This may be a
more common situation than you thought. e.g., don't you want to jump to the
definition of a function from the documentation (which is written in some
markup language)?

Intelligent tools could hardly do this, since it only understands one language.

Citre could support multi-language projects easily. But at the same time, this
means it's harder (and more meaningless) to provide language specific support.
For example, Even if Citre supports C and Python respectively, which means it
could (intelligently) filter C tags when in C code, and Python tags when in
Python code, it's useless when jumping from Python to C, since you are in the
context of Python, you can't filter the C tags based on the context.

## The UI design

So basically, we give up understanding the code by context, as it contradicts
with the strengths of ctags, which is discussed above. Rather, I want to take
the below approach, for both auto-completion and finding definitions:

1. Citre filters and sorts the tags by absolute minimum predicates. This means
   we try to offer good enough results (by filtering out unneeded tags), but it
   should never throw away a tag that may be needed in any situation,
   particularly when working with user-defined kinds and multi-language
   projects (corresponding to the 2 unique strengths of ctags).
2. The user further filters by inputting things. Then there's few left, so the
   user could pick one.

1 is required by the nature of ctags. If there are too many tags after 1, then
2 is necessary for offering a small subset of them. *Logically, this is what a
"ctags frontend done right" should be*.

### Filtering/sorting by Citre

Now let's talk about what is "absolute minimum predicates".

For auto-completion, it's safe to filter out:

- anonymous tags (they can't be referenced by a name)
- reference tags (definition tags already have all the names we need)
- file tags (unless we are sure the user needs a file name here)
- tags that have "file" scope, and is not in this file (so they can't be used)

What "safe" here means is: in all situations we can think of (especially in
multi-language project, and with user-defined kinds), the tags needed by the
user won't exist in these tags, so we could throw them away.

I once thought it's safe to restrict the `language` field. For example, we can
filter C/C++ tags when completing C code (since the header files are counted as
C++ code). For multi-language programming, this shouldn't be a problem. For
example, when calling a function in language B from language A, there should be
a function definition in language A that wraps the implementation in language
B. And for auto-completion, we only need the symbol name, not the location of
its definition. But the truth is:

- the wrapper code can be generated by a tool, and it may not exist in the
  project, but in some cache directory (see
  [here](https://github.com/universal-ctags/citre/pull/48) for an example).
- User-defined kinds typically involve user-defined sub-language (which is
  encouraged as it never conflicts with the kind names of the base language).

For finding definitions, it's safe to filter out:

- file tags
- tags that have "file" scope, and is not in this file

Anonymous tags shouldn't be throw away, since they can appear in the `typeref`
or `scope` fields of other tags, and they can be shown to the user by Citre, so
the user may get the name of an anonymous tag.

In Citre, we sort the tags to put definition tags above reference tags, so when
the user needs a reference tag, they could browse the list from the end.

Sometimes we want to make "very likely to be true" assumptions. For example,
when the cursor is after a dot in C code, the user may very likely needs a
struct member, but we are not sure about this, as they may actually want a
macro. In these situations, we could make use of the sorter expression. Just
put the members on top of the list, but still keep all the other tags just in
case they are needed.

### Filtering by the user

Then the results could be further filtered by user input. For now:

- For auto-completion you can further filter by tag names.
- In `citre-jump` you can further filter by file paths.

I have 2 ideas for the existing tools:

- Filtering by file paths for auto-completion is meaningful, as the user may
  want "a symbol from a library", which must exists in a path like
  `../library-name/..`.
- `citre-peek` doesn't have such a mechanism for now, and I want to add one.

These mechanisms are sufficient most of the time, but they don't meet the needs
for complex filtering rules. Here's an example I have in mind. The user inputs:

```
something kind:^member$ kind:^macro$ input:.c$
```

This searches the tags whose names contain `something`, with the kind `member`
or `macro`, and whose paths end with `.c`. We can also offer abbreviate like
`k` for `kind`, `p` for `input` (path), `t` for `typeref`, etc.

The point is:

- A tags file contains a lot of tags.
- Since there's a lot, we need to filter them before using them.
- Auto-completion and finding definitions are 2 typical tasks for programmers,
  where we can design the efficient filtering rules.
- Auto-completion and finding definitions may cover 95% of the usage of a tags
  file. But there are other usages (e.g. the user wants to know all functions
  in a module, or all methods of a class). These usages can be covered by a
  general mechanism of "filtering the tags by user input". That's where the
  "complex filtering rules" above are useful.

This is hard to implement in the existing tools. I'm thinking about a new tool
for this, see [this
discussion](https://github.com/universal-ctags/citre/discussions/47).
